---
layout: post
title:  "Some SARS data"
description: "Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) data for international spread collated from the WHO website maintained during the 2003 epidemic."
date:   2014-08-19 00:39:22 -0600
categories: data datasets epidemiology
---
(This is reposted from my web page, where it has been since the indicated date.)

## Introduction

As part of my work on the spatio-temporal spread of infectious diseases, I have had to use the Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) data available on the WHO website ([here](http://www.who.int/csr/sars/country/en/)).
This data comes in a challenging form: each page contains the report for a single day and the information
presented evolves through time. The latter is to be expected: as the epidemic unfolded, the type of information
that was required to deal with the problem evolved. However, in order to be able to use the data, some processing
is necessary.


Formatting the data to make it easier to use was a somewhat long and rather annoying process and since this is
publicly available data, I thought I would save others interested in this type of problems the time that it took
me to do this, by making this processed data public as well.

## Caveat
The WHO data was obtained during the course of the SARS epidemic. Some of the data was revised, but only a few
days after it was initially posted. Therefore, compared to more thorough post-epidemic investigation and data
gathering, the data here cannot be considered as the most up to date.

## Epochs in the data
There are three main phases in the data, characterized by different variables being reported. In the processed
data, all these variables are present, although they are empty for data in an epoch that does not report about
given variables.

+ *17 March to 9 April*. During this period, the variables considered are, for each country, the total number of
cases, the number of deaths and the presence or absence of local transmission.

+ *10 April to 1 May*. To the variables already mentioned are added the number of new cases since the
last WHO update and the number of recovered individuals. From 17 April, the date of the last report for each
country is listed.

+ *2 May to 11 July*. The last epoch in the dataset drops the local transmission information (an additional
dataset, that I have not processed yet, lists for each country affected, the regions where transmission is taking
place) but adds a variable that indicates the date for which the cumulative number of cases is current.

## Tidying up the data

As much of the information as possible was retained, with a few exceptions; see below. Dates were formatted
consistently. The times at which the reports were posted are also available. When notes were relative to a given
country on a given day, they are included as notes. The only notes that were omitted are relative to the general
handling of the data. They are available in the full file, though.

## Data files
Several data files are available.

+ The main cleaned-up file, in CSV format ([file](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/julien-arino/datasets/master/SARS_data.csv)).

+ The raw, almost unprocessed [file](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/julien-arino/datasets/master/SARS_data.raw.txt) obtained by cutting and pasting the content of all the
pages on the WHO site into a single file. The notes omitted in the cleaned-up file are present in this version.

